Background
Encapsulation is a programming technique that helps developers keeping 
code readable and maintainable. However, encapsulation in modern object 
oriented languages often causes significant runtime overhead. Thus, 
developers, including video games developers, must choose between clean 
encapsulated code or fast code. Since, in the application domain of 
computer games speed of execution is of most importance, developers usually 
decide for fast code. Similar problems are noticeable in other aspects of game 
development such as the one of networking, where developers, due to a lack 
of an effective support of networking primitives by the adopted tools, have to write complex 
networking code. This often results in overlaps with the networking logic and the game logic,
thus affecting the code maintainability.


Aim
This article explores to what extent game development would benefit from
the use of encapsulation in code and other games abstractions such as networking.


Method
In this work we discuss how encapsulation is embedded in the Casanova 2 
game development language, and show how Casanova 2 allows developers to 
write encapsulated game code that, thanks to extensive optimization, 
achieves high levels of performance. 
Furthermore, we show that the abstractions provided by Casanova 2 so far 
cover no more than the tip of the iceberg: we document a further extension 
in the traditionally challenging domain of networking.

Results
Code compactness has been measured to evaluate the quality of our proposed 
methods: encapsulation in code and embedded networking.
Moreover, the speed of Casanova 2 has been evaluated in comparison with the speed of code written 
in representative languages for game development. 

This evaluation demonstrates that Casanova 2 runs faster than or at a comparable level 
to the other languages.


Conclusions
By means of domain abstraction and domain optimization the resulting Casanova 2
code is compact (even in the presence of networking considerations), maintainable 
(due to encapsulation), and fast (thanks to our optimizer); all aspects that improve productivity.